Add OL 21.0.0.2-beta Release Blog to Staging (#1019)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2021-01-22-ee9-messaging-security-21002-beta.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta"
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/austin0
author_github: https://github.com/austin0
seo-title: Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: Three new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, and Jakarta Batch 2.0, join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty.

Reviewer: In reality only 2 new Jakarta features are in this beta release -- Jakarta Batch 2.0 and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0.

Messaging was in the last beta.  Maybe we just didn't talk about it?

appSecurity-4.0 has been in the betas for a long time.  The Liberty security functions tolerating Jakarta 9 function though is newer in the last few betas.  

Not sure if you want to make changes, but for sure need to add XML Web Services 3.0 to the list of new features in 21.0.0.2-beta.

Maybe you say Jakarta Batch 2.0 and Jakarta XML WebServices 3.0 are new in this beta instead of security and messaging.

Author: Messaging did go into the last beta but never made it into a blog so has been included in 21.0.0.2-beta.

I can only go off of the information provided to me in issues (https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues?q=label%3Arelease%3A21002-beta+label%3ABlog+0), I'll definitely add XML Web Services to the list of EE 9 Features but do you know who I should go to for a more detailed writeup?

I'm also going to add a disclaimer that Messaging was added in 21.0.0.1-beta but missed the blog.

Reviewer: I do not see mention of XML Web Services here like you do below.

You should go to @neuwerk for a more detailed writeup for XML Web Services.

blog_description: Three new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, and Jakarta Batch 2.0, join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta
Austin Bailey <https://github.com/austin0>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

> New in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta are three new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, and Jakarta Batch 2.0, that join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty. Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta also includes previews for 7 of the updated MicroProfile modules, including Config, Metrics, Fault Tolerance, Health, OpenAPI, Rest Client, and JWT. 

Reviewer 2: ~for 7 of the~
for 8 of the

Author: Fixed.

Reviewer: Not sure if this got undone.  It says 7 again.  The list should have the 8th one though as well.  The missing one is OpenTracing.

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], here are the coordinates:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
  <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
  <version>21.0.0.2-beta</version>
  <type>pom</type>
</dependency>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle]:

[source,gradle]
----
dependencies {
    libertyRuntime group: 'io.openliberty.beta', name: 'openliberty-runtime', version: '[21.0.0.2-beta,)'
}
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/downloads/#runtime_betas[Downloads page].

[#jakarta]
== Jakarta EE 9 Beta Features package

The main change visible to developers in Jakarta EE is the names of packages changing to accomodate the new `jakarta.*` namespace. In this Open Liberty beta, we have a number of new API Release Candidates to join the expanding library of supported Jakarta packages.

This Open Liberty beta introduces the following Jakarta EE 9 features which now possess their all-new Jakarta EE 9 package names:

> * <<messaiging, Messaging 3.0 (`messaging-3.0, messagingClient-3.0, messagingServer-3.0, messagingSecurity-3.0`)>>

Reviewer 2: ~<<messaiging~
<<messaging,

Author: Fixed.

* <<security, Security 2.0 (`appSecurity-4.0, appSecurityClient-1.0`)>>

> * Batch 2.0 (`batch-2.0`)

Reviewer: XML Web Services 3.0 ('xmlWS-3.0') should be added

Reviewer: Should all of these be prefaced with Jakarta, i.e. Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, Jakarta Batch 2.0 and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0.

Author: Added and updated.

> These join the Jakarta EE 9 features in link:https://openliberty.io/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty betas]:

Reviewer: This beta includes beta function for all Jakarta 9 sub specifications.  It is the first beta to do that.  We may want to highlight that with a statement.  Can be here, or can be in another places.  I was thinking something like:

With the additions of these features, all features needing to run Jakarta EE 9 applications are available in this beta.

Author: Added `With these additions, all features needed to run Jakarta EE 9 applications are available in this Open Liberty beta release.`.

* Jakarta WebSocket 2.0 (`websocket-2.0`; now with full CDI integration)
* RESTful Web Services 3.0 (`restfulWS-3.0` and `restfulWSClient-3.0`)
* Jakarta Server Faces 3.0 (`faces-3.0`)
* Jakarta Connectors 2.0 (`connectors-2.0`)
* Jakarta Enterprise Beans 4.0 (`enterpriseBeans-4.0`)
* Jakarta Enterprise Beans Remote 4.0 (`enterpriseBeansRemote-4.0`)
* Jakarta Enterprise Beans Home 4.0 (`enterpriseBeansHome-4.0`)

> * Jakarta Enterprise Beans Lite 4.0 (`enterpriseBeansLite-4.0`)

Reviewer: Do we want to include enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer-4.0 feature?  It would look like:  Jakarta Enterprise Beans Persistent Timers 4.0 ('enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer-4.0')

Author: Added

> * Jakarta EE Application Client 9.0 (`javaeeClient-9.0`)

Reviewer: It should be jakartaeeClient-9.0, not javaeeClient-9.0

Author: Updated.

* Jakarta Authentication 2.0 (`jaspic-2.0`)

> * Jakarta Authorization 2.0 (`jacc-2.0`)

Reviewer: jaspic-2.0 is now appAuthentication-2.0 and jacc-2.0 is now appAuthorization-2.0

Author: Thanks, updated.

> * Jakarta Persistence 3.0 (includes Eclipselink 3.0-RC1.) (`jpa-3.0`)

Reviewer: We are now using EclipseLink 3.0.0 GA level not the RC1 level any longer.

Reviewer: It is also now called persistence-3.0, not jpa-3.0

Author: Updated both, thanks.

Reviewer: The end quote is missing for persistence-3.0

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> * Jakarta XML Binding 3.0 (`jaxb-3.0`)

Reviewer: jaxb-3.0 is now xmlBinding-3.0

Author: Updated.

* Jakarta Managed Beans 2.0 (`managedBeans-2.0`)
* Jakarta Concurrency 2.0 (`concurrent-2.0`)
* Jakarta Bean Validation 3.0 (`beanValidation-3.0`)
* Jakarta Contexts and Dependency Injection 3.0 (`cdi-3.0`)
* Message-Driven Beans 4.0 (`mdb-4.0`)
* JDBC 4.2 & 4.3 (`jdbc-4.2` & `jdbc-4.3`)

> * Jakarta Transactions 2.0 (`transaction-2.0`)

Reviewer: Jakarta Transaction 2.0 is not a public feature so not sure if you want to have the transaction-2.0 listed there because a customer cannot enable it in the server.xml.

Author: Removed for now, need to find out why it was originally added.

* Jakarta JSON Binding 2.0 (`jsonb-2.0`)
* Jakarta JSON Processing 2.0 (`jsonp-2.0`)
* Jakarta Servlet 5.0 (`servlet-5.0`)
* Jakarta Server Pages 3.0 (`jsp-3.0` now `pages-3.0`)

> * Jakarta Expression Language 4.0 (`el-4.0` now `expressionLanguage-4.0`)

Reviewer: Jakarta Mail ('mail-2.0") is missing from the list

Reviewer: The ones that say xxx-y.z now xxxx-y.z have been the new name for a while.  Should we just have the new name now?

Author: Mail added and removed old names.

Reviewer: You have "Jakarta Jakarta Mail".  It should just be Jakarta Mail.

Author: Fixed.

[#messaging]
=== Messaging 3.0

Jakarta Messaging is an API and services that enable applications to create, send, and receive messages via loosely coupled, reliable asynchronous communications. Support for version 3.0 updates the API and services to the jakarta.* namespace and introduces four new features for Jakarta EE 9: `messaging-3.0`, `messagingClient-3.0`, `messagingServer-3.0`, `messagingSecurity-3.0`.

> Configuration is the same as the corresponding features for Jakarta EE 8 (`jms-2.0`, `wasJmsClient-2.0`, `wasJmsServer-1.0`, `wasJmsSecurity-1.0`) with one exception: version 3.0 support does not introduce a new feature corresponding to `jmsMdb-1.0`. Instead, use Jakarta EE 9 feature `mdb-4.0` when deploying message-driven beans to connect to MQ providers, JCA resource adapters, or the embedded messaging server.

Reviewer: JCA should be Jakarta Connectors

Author: Updated.

To enable the new Jakarta EE 9 messaging features, add them to your `server.xml`. Here's a feature configuration that enables applications to access message queues via the Messaging 3.0 API, enables message-driven beans to connect to the embedded messaging server, and enables JNDI lookups for messaging resources.

The following features can be included in your server.xml:

[source, xml]
----
 <featureManager>
       <feature>messagingClient-3.0</feature>
       <feature>mdb-4.0</feature>
       <feature>jndi-1.0</feature>
 </featureManager>
----

> Additional information about the Jakarta Server Faces 3.0 specification can be found link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/faces/3.0/[here].

Reviewer 2: ~Additional information about the Jakarta Server Faces 3.0 specification can be found link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/faces/3.0/[here].~
Additional information about the Jakarta Messaging 3.0 specification can be found link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/messaging/3.0/[here].

Author: Thanks for catching.

[#security]
=== Security 2.0

The new `appSecurity-4.0` feature has been created to support Jakarta EE 9 and introduces Jakarta Security 2.0 support. The `appSecurityClient-1.0`, `audit-1.0`, `constrainedDelegation-1.0`, `jcaInboundSecurity-1.0`, `jwt-1.0`, `passwordUtilities-1.0` and `spnego-1.0` features have been updated to also support Jakarta EE 9.

> The appSecurity-4.0 feature must be added to `server.xml` when using application security with Jakarta EE 9. The other `security-2.0` will automatically adapt to the level of Java EE or Jakarta EE that is already in use, so no change is needed when using them with Jakarta EE 9.

Reviewer 2: The other `security-2.0` ***features*** will ...

Reviewer: "The other 'security-2.0' features will " is confusing to me.  Should it say "The other Liberty security features will "  ?

Author: Decided to go with `The other security-2.0 features will`

Reviewer: The other features are NOT Jakarta features which is why it confuses me to use that the "other security-2.0 features" terminology.  It is also weird because security-2.0 is not a liberty feature name.  That is why I suggested what I did.  You could say something like, "The other Liberty security features that depend on the Java EE or Jakarta EE Securty feature now automatically ...."  or something like that.

Author: Ah I see now, thanks. `The other security-2.0 features will` -> `The other Liberty security features will`

The following features can be included in your server.xml:

[source, xml]
----
 <featureManager>
       <feature>appSecurity-4.0</feature>
       <feature>appSecurityClient-1.0</feature>
       <feature>audit-1.0</feature>
       <feature>constrainedDelegation-1.0</feature>
       <feature>jcaInboundSecurity-1.0</feature>
       <feature>jwt-1.0</feature>
       <feature>passwordUtilities-1.0</feature>
       <feature>spnego-1.0</feature>
 </featureManager>
----

> 

Reviewer 2: Additional information about the Jakarta Security 2.0 specification can be found link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/security/2.0/[here].

Author: Added.

> Enable the Jakarta EE 9 beta features in your app's `server.xml`. You can enable the individual features you want or you can just add the Jakarta EE 9 convenience feature to enable all of the Jakarta EE 9 beta features at once:

Reviewer: So do we need a section about Jakarta Batch and Jakarta XML Web Services and how to enable those features?

Author: As far as I know Batch was just a namespace update? No information was provided for either feature so it may need to be added after the blog is published.

Reviewer: In the end they all are just namespace updates and package name changes from javax to jakarta.

Austin Bailey <https://github.com/austin0>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

New in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta are four new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, Jakarta Batch 2.0, and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0,that join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty. Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta also includes previews for 8 of the updated MicroProfile modules, including Config, Metrics, OpenTracing, Fault Tolerance, Health, OpenAPI, Rest Client, and JWT. 

We have two beta packages for link:{url-about}[Open Liberty]:

* <<allbeta, All Beta Features>>: a larger package that contains all Open Liberty beta features (including Jakarta EE 9 beta features) and GA features and functions.
* <<jakarta, Jakarta EE 9 Beta Features>>: a lightweight package that contains only the Jakarta EE 9 features.

This means that you can now try out our in-development Open Liberty features by just adding the relevant coordinates to your build tools.

If you try either package, <<feedback, let us know what you think>>.
[#allbeta]
== All Beta Features package

> The All Beta Features package includes the following beta features:
> 
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/10/27/microprofile40-jakartaee9-beta-200012.html#conf[MicroProfile Config 2.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#metrics[MicroProfile Metrics 3.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#opentracing[MicroProfile OpenTracing 2.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#fault[MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 3.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#health[MicroProfile Health 3.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/29/microprofile-openapi-beta-200011.html#openAPI[MicroProfile OpenAPI 2.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/11/24/microprofile-rest-client-kubernetes-secrets-21001beta.html#MP[MicroProfile Rest Client 2.0]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/10/27/microprofile40-jakartaee9-beta-200012.html#jwt[MicroProfile JWT 1.2]
> * link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/11/24/microprofile-rest-client-kubernetes-secrets-21001beta.html#kube[Using Kubernetes secrets in Liberty variables]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The All Beta Features package includes the following beta features:

* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/10/27/microprofile40-jakartaee9-beta-200012.html#conf[MicroProfile Config 2.0]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#metrics[MicroProfile Metrics 3.0]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#opentracing[MicroProfile OpenTracing 2.0]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/02/jakarta-microprofile-beta-200010.html#health[MicroProfile Health 3.0]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/09/29/microprofile-openapi-beta-200011.html#openAPI[MicroProfile OpenAPI 2.0]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/11/24/microprofile-rest-client-kubernetes-secrets-21001beta.html#MP[MicroProfile Rest Client 2.0]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/10/27/microprofile40-jakartaee9-beta-200012.html#jwt[MicroProfile JWT 1.2]
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2020/11/24/microprofile-rest-client-kubernetes-secrets-21001beta.html#kube[Using Kubernetes secrets in Liberty variables]

You can enable these features by adding the short feature name (and any dependencies) to your Liberty server's `server.xml` file, e.g. for MicroProfile Config 2.0:

> <featureManager>
>     <feature>cdi-2.0</feature>
>     <feature>mpConfig-2.0</feature>
> </featureManager>

Note for the `21.0.0.2-beta` release `microProfile-4.0` and `mpFaultTolerance-3.0` cannot be enabled as features due to a known bug: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/15649 
```

Reviewer 3: Note: I had to use a `quote` rather than a `code block` for the `featureManager` code as a `code block` messed with the `suggestion` formatting. It should be a `code block`, i.e. 
```
<featureManager>
    <feature>cdi-2.0</feature>
    <feature>mpConfig-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
```

Author: Alternate suggestion added.

Reviewer: Not sure why Joseph suggested removing the Fault Tolerance link above.  I think it should be put back.

> === Try it now 
> 
> To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 15, Java SE 11, or Java SE 8.
> 
> If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], here are the coordinates:
> 
> [source,xml]
> ----
> <dependency>
>   <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
>   <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
>   <version>21.0.0.2-beta</version>
>   <type>pom</type>
> </dependency>
> ----

Reviewer 3: I think this needs updating a bit:
```suggestion
=== Try it now 

To try out these features, just update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 15, Java SE 11, or Java SE 8.

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], add the following `runtimeArtifact` section to the `configuration` section of your `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<runtimeArtifact>
    <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
    <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
    <version>21.0.0.2-beta</version>
    <type>zip</type>
</runtimeArtifact>
----
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

Reviewer: This was updated in one place, but not the other one completely.

Author: Updated for EE9 section.

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta"
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/austin0
author_github: https://github.com/austin0
seo-title: Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Three new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, and Jakarta Batch 2.0, join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty.
blog_description: Three new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, and Jakarta Batch 2.0, join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta
Austin Bailey <https://github.com/austin0>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

> New in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta are four Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, Jakarta Batch 2.0, and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0, that join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty. Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta also includes previews for 7 of the updated MicroProfile features, including Config, Metrics, OpenTracing, Health, OpenAPI, Rest Client, and JWT. 

Reviewer: Is this truly supposed to say "large stable"

Author: Changed to `collection`.

> New in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta are four new Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, Jakarta Batch 2.0, and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0,that join the large stable of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty. Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta also includes previews for 7 of the updated MicroProfile modules, including Config, Metrics, OpenTracing, Fault Tolerance, Health, OpenAPI, Rest Client, and JWT. 

Reviewer 2: Double 'new', remove the second.
New in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta are four ~new~ Jakarta EE...

Missing space in "Web Services 3.0,that"

instead of "modules" say "features" in "7 of the updated MicroProfile ~modules~features,"

remove "Fault Tolerance," from the list features

Author: All changes have been made, thanks.

---
layout: post

> title: "Jakarta EE 9 Messaging and Security packages now available with Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta"

Reviewer 2: Change all the titles to:
"With Jakarta Batch and XML Web Services features, all Jakarta EE 9 features now available in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta."

Change all the descriptions to:
With four new Jakarta EE 9 features, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, Jakarta Batch 2.0, and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0, all Jakarta EE 9 features now available in Open Liberty.

Author: All updated.

* <<allbeta, All Beta Features>>: a larger package that contains all Open Liberty beta features (including Jakarta EE 9 beta features) and GA features and functions.

This means that you can now try out our in-development Open Liberty features by just adding the relevant coordinates to your build tools.

If you try either package, <<feedback, let us know what you think>>.

[#jakarta]
== Jakarta EE 9 Beta Features package

The main change visible to developers in Jakarta EE is the names of packages changing to accomodate the new `jakarta.*` namespace. In this Open Liberty beta, we have a number of new API Release Candidates to join the expanding library of supported Jakarta packages.

This Open Liberty beta introduces the following Jakarta EE 9 features which now possess their all-new Jakarta EE 9 package names:

* <<messaging, Jakarta Messaging 3.0 (`messaging-3.0, messagingClient-3.0, messagingServer-3.0, messagingSecurity-3.0`)>>
* <<security, Jakarta Security 2.0 (`appSecurity-4.0, appSecurityClient-1.0`)>>
* Jakarta Batch 2.0 (`batch-2.0`)
* Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0 (`xmlWS-3.0`)

> With these additions, all features needed to run Jakarta EE 9 applications are available in this Open Liberty beta release.

Reviewer 2: Lets move this up to the second sentence in the opening paragraph, so:

> New in Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta are four Jakarta EE 9 packages, Jakarta Messaging 3.0, Jakarta Security 2.0, Jakarta Batch 2.0, and Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0, that join the collection of Jakarta EE 9 packages already available within Open Liberty. **With these additions, all features needed to run Jakarta EE 9 applications are available in this Open Liberty beta release.**  Open Liberty 21.0.0.2-beta also includes previews for 7 of the updated MicroProfile features, including Config, Metrics, OpenTracing, Health, OpenAPI, Rest Client, and JWT.

Author: Moved.
